README.md, before:

# Dedalus Perl SDK

This repository hosts the in-progress Dedalus Perl SDK. The project mirrors the behavior of the Python SDK while using idiomatic Perl tooling.

## Status

Planning and scaffolding. See `PLAN.md`, `CHECKLIST.md`, and `METHODOLOGY.md` for progress tracking.

The first resource implemented is the `health` endpoint so we can exercise an end-to-end API call.

## Development

```
cpanm --installdeps .
perl Makefile.PL
make test
```

> Tests currently rely on `Test2::V0`. Run `cpanm --installdeps .` to install the dependencies listed in `cpanfile` (AnyEvent, AnyEvent::HTTP, Mojolicious, etc.).

### Linting & CI

Run `script/lint.sh` to execute `perlcritic` and ensure files are formatted according to `.perltidyrc`. GitHub Actions (see `.github/workflows/ci.yml`) installs dependencies for Perl 5.36/5.38, runs `make test`, and enforces the lint pipeline on every push/PR.

### Release process

See `RELEASE.md` for the current manual release flow (version bump, changelog update, lint/test gates, tagging, and CPAN upload steps). Future automation should mirror the Python SDK’s release scripts, so keep that document up to date as tooling evolves.

## Quick API check

Set `DEDALUS_API_KEY` and run the example script:

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/health_check.pl
```

This script calls `GET /health` and prints the response status to confirm connectivity.

### Environment selection

By default the SDK targets the production API host baked into `Dedalus::Config`. Override it with `DEDALUS_BASE_URL` (or pass `base_url => ...` to `Dedalus->new`) when hitting preview/staging environments:

```
export DEDALUS_BASE_URL="https://api.staging.dedalus.ai"
```

`Dedalus::Config->environment` reports the active environment string; include it when sharing bug reports with the Dedalus team.

### Chat completion example

After the health check works, try a simple chat completion:

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/chat_completion.pl
```

The script sends a `chat.completions.create` request and prints the assistant's response. Set `DEDALUS_MODEL` to target a specific model ID if needed.

### Streaming chat completions

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/chat_stream_live.pl "Hello, how do you feel today?"
```

Chunks print as soon as they arrive. The underlying `Dedalus::Stream` object yields decoded SSE payloads until the `[DONE]` sentinel is reached.

### Async usage

The async client returns `Future` instances so you can compose or await results:

```
perl -Ilib -MDedalus::Async -MFuture -e '
    my $client = Dedalus::Async->new;
    my $f = $client->chat->completions->create(
        model    => "openai/gpt-5-nano",
        messages => [{ role => "user", content => "Hi" }],
    );
    my $completion = $f->get;
    print $completion->model, "\n";
'
```

Async wrappers currently cover chat completions along with audio, embeddings, image edits/variations, models, and health checks. Sample scripts:

```
perl examples/async_chat_completion.pl "Prompt here"
perl examples/async_audio_transcription.pl /path/to/audio.wav
perl examples/async_create_embedding.pl
perl examples/async_image_generate.pl "A watercolor portrait" output.png
```

### Listing models

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/list_models.pl
```

Use `models->retrieve($id)` to inspect capabilities and defaults for a specific model.

### Creating embeddings

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/create_embedding.pl
```

Override `DEDALUS_EMBEDDING_MODEL` or `DEDALUS_EMBEDDING_INPUT` to customize the request. The script prints the embedding dimensions returned by the API.

### Audio transcription

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/audio_transcription.pl /path/to/audio.wav
```

Set `DEDALUS_AUDIO_FILE` or pass the file path as the first argument. Override `DEDALUS_TRANSCRIPTION_MODEL` to choose a different Whisper-compatible ID. The script prints the transcript returned by the API.

### Audio translation

Use the same API entry point but target `/audio/translations` when you need English output:

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/audio_translation.pl /path/to/audio.wav
```

### Text-to-speech

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/text_to_speech.pl "Hello Dedalus" output.mp3
```

Set `response_format` to `mp3`, `wav`, etc., as needed. The return value is a hash with `content`, `headers`, and `status` so you can write the binary blob to disk.

### Image generation

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/image_generate.pl "A watercolor portrait of Stephen Dedalus"
```

Set `DEDALUS_IMAGE_PROMPT`, `DEDALUS_IMAGE_MODEL`, or `DEDALUS_IMAGE_OUTPUT` to customize the request. If the API returns base64 data the script writes it to disk; otherwise it prints the image URL for manual download.

### Using the responses endpoint

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/create_response.pl "Summarize Dedalus in one sentence"
```

The script hits `POST /v1/responses`, prints the response ID, and dumps message blocks if the API returns structured output. If your current `DEDALUS_BASE_URL` does not expose `/v1/responses`, the script logs the missing-endpoint details (base URL, environment, SDK version, etc.) and automatically falls back to `chat.completions.create` so the example still produces output. Provide `DEDALUS_RESPONSE_MODEL` to override the default model ID.

Additional details will be added as the SDK implementation evolves.

### File uploads and downloads

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl -Ilib -e '
    use Dedalus;
    use Dedalus::FileUpload;
    my $client = Dedalus->new;
    my $file = $client->files->upload(
        purpose => "fine-tune",
        file    => Dedalus::FileUpload->from_path("training.jsonl"),
        metadata => { note => "demo" },
    );
    my $download = $client->files->content->retrieve($file->id);
    print length($download->{content}), " bytes saved\n";
'
```

`Dedalus::FileUpload` also accepts in-memory scalars or IO handles so you can stream data directly without writing temp files. `files->list` and `files->retrieve($id)` return typed `Dedalus::Types::FileObject` instances so you can inspect metadata before downloading content.

Commit message:

feat(images): add streaming support with typed events

README.md, after:

# Dedalus Perl SDK

This repository hosts the in-progress Dedalus Perl SDK. The project mirrors the behavior of the Python SDK while using idiomatic Perl tooling.

## Status

Planning and scaffolding. See `PLAN.md`, `CHECKLIST.md`, and `METHODOLOGY.md` for progress tracking.

The first resource implemented is the `health` endpoint so we can exercise an end-to-end API call.

## Development

```
cpanm --installdeps .
perl Makefile.PL
make test
```

> Tests currently rely on `Test2::V0`. Run `cpanm --installdeps .` to install the dependencies listed in `cpanfile` (AnyEvent, AnyEvent::HTTP, Mojolicious, etc.).

### Linting & CI

Run `script/lint.sh` to execute `perlcritic` and ensure files are formatted according to `.perltidyrc`. GitHub Actions (see `.github/workflows/ci.yml`) installs dependencies for Perl 5.36/5.38, runs `make test`, and enforces the lint pipeline on every push/PR.

### Release process

See `RELEASE.md` for the current manual release flow (version bump, changelog update, lint/test gates, tagging, and CPAN upload steps). Future automation should mirror the Python SDK’s release scripts, so keep that document up to date as tooling evolves.

## Quick API check

Set `DEDALUS_API_KEY` and run the example script:

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/health_check.pl
```

This script calls `GET /health` and prints the response status to confirm connectivity.

### Environment selection

By default the SDK targets the production API host baked into `Dedalus::Config`. Override it with `DEDALUS_BASE_URL` (or pass `base_url => ...` to `Dedalus->new`) when hitting preview/staging environments:

```
export DEDALUS_BASE_URL="https://api.staging.dedalus.ai"
```

`Dedalus::Config->environment` reports the active environment string; include it when sharing bug reports with the Dedalus team.

### Chat completion example

After the health check works, try a simple chat completion:

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/chat_completion.pl
```

The script sends a `chat.completions.create` request and prints the assistant's response. Set `DEDALUS_MODEL` to target a specific model ID if needed.

### Streaming chat completions

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/chat_stream_live.pl "Hello, how do you feel today?"
```

Chunks print as soon as they arrive. The underlying `Dedalus::Stream` object yields decoded SSE payloads until the `[DONE]` sentinel is reached.

### Async usage

The async client returns `Future` instances so you can compose or await results:

```
perl -Ilib -MDedalus::Async -MFuture -e '
    my $client = Dedalus::Async->new;
    my $f = $client->chat->completions->create(
        model    => "openai/gpt-5-nano",
        messages => [{ role => "user", content => "Hi" }],
    );
    my $completion = $f->get;
    print $completion->model, "\n";
'
```

Async wrappers currently cover chat completions along with audio, embeddings, image edits/variations, models, and health checks. Sample scripts:

```
perl examples/async_chat_completion.pl "Prompt here"
perl examples/async_audio_transcription.pl /path/to/audio.wav
perl examples/async_create_embedding.pl
perl examples/async_image_generate.pl "A watercolor portrait" output.png
```

### Listing models

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/list_models.pl
```

Use `models->retrieve($id)` to inspect capabilities and defaults for a specific model.

### Creating embeddings

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/create_embedding.pl
```

Override `DEDALUS_EMBEDDING_MODEL` or `DEDALUS_EMBEDDING_INPUT` to customize the request. The script prints the embedding dimensions returned by the API.

### Audio transcription

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/audio_transcription.pl /path/to/audio.wav
```

Set `DEDALUS_AUDIO_FILE` or pass the file path as the first argument. Override `DEDALUS_TRANSCRIPTION_MODEL` to choose a different Whisper-compatible ID. The script prints the transcript returned by the API.

### Audio translation

Use the same API entry point but target `/audio/translations` when you need English output:

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/audio_translation.pl /path/to/audio.wav
```

### Text-to-speech

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/text_to_speech.pl "Hello Dedalus" output.mp3
```

Set `response_format` to `mp3`, `wav`, etc., as needed. The return value is a hash with `content`, `headers`, and `status` so you can write the binary blob to disk.

### Image generation

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/image_generate.pl "A watercolor portrait of Stephen Dedalus"
```

Set `DEDALUS_IMAGE_PROMPT`, `DEDALUS_IMAGE_MODEL`, or `DEDALUS_IMAGE_OUTPUT` to customize the request. If the API returns base64 data the script writes it to disk; otherwise it prints the image URL for manual download.

Set `stream => 1` when calling `$client->images->generate(...)` to receive a `Dedalus::Stream` of `Dedalus::Types::Image::StreamEvent` chunks so you can render partial images as soon as they arrive.

### Using the responses endpoint

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl examples/create_response.pl "Summarize Dedalus in one sentence"
```

The script hits `POST /v1/responses`, prints the response ID, and dumps message blocks if the API returns structured output. If your current `DEDALUS_BASE_URL` does not expose `/v1/responses`, the script logs the missing-endpoint details (base URL, environment, SDK version, etc.) and automatically falls back to `chat.completions.create` so the example still produces output. Provide `DEDALUS_RESPONSE_MODEL` to override the default model ID.

Additional details will be added as the SDK implementation evolves.

### File uploads and downloads

```
export DEDALUS_API_KEY=sk-...
perl -Ilib -e '
    use Dedalus;
    use Dedalus::FileUpload;
    my $client = Dedalus->new;
    my $file = $client->files->upload(
        purpose => "fine-tune",
        file    => Dedalus::FileUpload->from_path("training.jsonl"),
        metadata => { note => "demo" },
    );
    my $download = $client->files->content->retrieve($file->id);
    print length($download->{content}), " bytes saved\n";
'
```

`Dedalus::FileUpload` also accepts in-memory scalars or IO handles so you can stream data directly without writing temp files. `files->list` and `files->retrieve($id)` return typed `Dedalus::Types::FileObject` instances so you can inspect metadata before downloading content.
